This chapter documents the backend for the MOS/Rockwell 6502
microprocessor family. It also supports the Rockwell/WDC 65C02,
the Hudson Soft HuC6280 and the WDC 65802/65816 instruction sets.

@section Legal

    This module is written in 2002,2006,2008-2012,2014-2024 by Frank Wille
    and is covered by the vasm copyright without modifications.


@section Additional options for this module

This module provides the following additional options:

@table @option
    @item -6280
        Recognize all HuC6280 instructions. Includes @code{setdp $2000}, so
        zero-page addressing modes will be automatically used from
        @code{$2000} to @code{$20ff}.
    @item -802
        Same as @option{-816}. There is no difference in the instruction set.
    @item -816
        Enables the 8/16 bit instruction set for the WDC65816/65802 and
        additional directives to switch loading of the accumulator and/or
        the index register between 8 and 16 bits.
        The target address size becomes 24 bits.
    @item -am
        Automatically mask values to match their data size or the size
        of immediate addressing, which effectively disables any range
        checks on immediate and data values in the assembler and linker.
    @item -bbcade
        Swap meaning of @code{<} and @code{>} selectors for compatibility
        with the BBC ADE assembler.
    @item -c02
        Recognize all 65C02 instructions. This excludes DTV (@option{-dtv})
        and illegal (@option{-illegal}) instructions.
    @item -ce02
        Enables the Commodore CSG65CE02 instruction set, which extends on
        the WDC02 instruction set.
    @item -dpo
        Generate 8-bit offset instead of absolute relocations when
        accessing a zero- or direct-page symbol.
    @item -dtv
        Recognize the three additional C64-DTV instructions.
    @item -illegal
        Allow 'illegal' 6502 instructions to be recognized.
    @item -mega65
        Enables the 45GS02 instruction set for the MEGA65 computer.
    @item -opt-branch
        Enables translation of @code{B<cc>} branches into sequences of
        @code{B<!cc> *+5 ; JMP label} when necessary. @code{BRA} (DTV, 65C02)
        is directly translated into a @code{JMP} when out of range.
        It also performs optimization of @code{JMP} to @code{BRA},
        whenever possible.
    @item -wdc02
        Recognize all 65C02 instructions and the WDC65C02 extensions
        (@code{RMB}, @code{SMB}, @code{BBR}, @code{BBS}, @code{STP}, @code{WAI)}.
@end table

@section General

This backend accepts 6502 family instructions as described in
the instruction set reference manuals from MOS and Rockwell, which are valid
for the following CPUs: 6502 - 6518, 6570, 6571, 6702, 7501, 8500, 8502.

Optionally accepts 65C02 family instructions as described in the
instruction set reference manuals from Rockwell and WDC. Also supports
the WDC extensions in the W65C02 and W65C134.

Optionally accepts 65CE02 family instructions as described in the
instruction set reference manuals from Commodore Semiconductor Group.

Optionally accepts HuC6280 instructions as described in the instruction
set reference manuals from Hudson Soft.

Optionally accepts 45GS02 instructions as defined by the Mega65 project.

Optionally accepts WDC65816 insructions as described in the Programming
Manual by The Western Design Center.

The target address type is 16 bits, or 24 bits in WDC65816 mode.

Instructions consist of one up to three bytes for the standard 6502 family
(up to 7 bytes for the 6280) and require no alignment.
There is also no alignment requirement for sections and data.

All known mnemonics for illegal 6502 instructions are optionally recognized
(e.g. @code{dcm} and @code{dcp} refer to the same instruction). Some illegal
insructions (e.g. @code{$ab}) are known to show unpredictable behaviour,
or do not always work the same on different CPUs.

Note that the WDC65816's @code{MVN} and @code{MVP} block move instructions
require a full 24-bit address (or a label) for the source and destination,
as documented in WDC's Programming Manual. To specify the bank only, you
have to use immediate addressing syntax. Example: @code{mvn #$7f,#^label}.

@section Extensions

Note that some of these extensions have changed with version 1.0 of
this backend. Bitstream-selectors (to get the low-byte, high-byte, etc. of
an expression) are no longer available as unary operators, to avoid
inconsistencies, and to better conform with classic assemblers and the
official WDC syntax.

This backend provides the following specific extensions:

@itemize @minus

@item Immediate addressing mode operands and data directives allow
 bitstream selector prefixes as the first character in the operand.
 @code{<} selects the least significant bits which fit into the current
 immediate or data field width (AKA low-byte for 8-bit data).
 @code{>} selects the same, but shifts the value right by 8 bits first
 (AKA high-byte for 8-bit data).
 @code{^} or @code{`} shifts the value by 16 bits first (AKA bank-byte
 for 8-bit data).
 Refer to chapter 6.3.3.4 (Byte Selection Operator) of the W65C816S datasheet.
 These selector prefixes are always valid, no matter if 6502 or 65816
 mode is active.
 See also option @option{-bbcade}, which swaps the meaning of the @code{<}
 and @code{>} selectors.

@item Other operands allow an addressing mode selector prefix as the
 first character in the operand field, which can be used as a hint for the
 assembler in case the best addressing mode cannot be determined (e.g.
 externally defined symbols), or to enforce a specific addressing mode
 (Example: @code{lda >$12} to enforce a 16-bit instead of a zero-page address).
 @code{<} enforces 8-bit (direct/zero-page) addressing.
 @code{|} or @code{!} enforces 16-bit (absolute) addressing.
 @code{>} enforces 24-bit (long absolute) addressing in 65816 mode, 16-bit
 otherwise.
 Refer to chapter 6.3.3.5 of the W65C816S datasheet.

@item The prefix character @code{?} can be used in immediate addressing
 modes and data directives to retrieve a symbol's memory/bank ID. Note,
 that this feature depends on a special relocation type, which is only
 supported by @code{vlink} and requires the @code{VOBJ} format.

@end itemize

This backend extends the selected syntax module by the following
directives:

@table @code
@item a8
      Declares that immediate instructions accessing the accumulator
      have 8 bits width (default, WDC65816 only).

@item a16
      Declares that immediate instructions accessing the accumulator
      have 16 bits width (WDC65816 only).

@item as
      Alias for @code{a8} (WDC65816 only).

@item al
      Alias for @code{a16} (WDC65816 only).

@item cpu <name>
      Define the cpu model. Must be specified before any code is generated
      and has priority over cpu settings on the command line.
      Most common names are recognized, like: @code{65c02}, @code{wdc02},
      @code{65816}, @code{HU6280}, @code{45gs02}, @code{6510}, etc.

@item <symbol> ezp <expr>
      Works exactly like the @code{equ} directive, but marks <symbol>
      as a zero/direct page symbol and use zero page addressing whenever
      <symbol> is used in a memory addressing mode.

@item longa on|off
      Turns 16-bit accumulator width on or off.
      WDC-style alias for @code{a16}/@code{a8} (WDC65816 only).

@item longi on|off
      Turns 16-bit index register width on or off.
      WDC-style alias for @code{x16}/@code{x8} (WDC65816 only).

@item setdp <expr>
      Set the current base address of the zero/direct page for
      optimizations from absolute to direct-page addressing modes.
      Can be set to any 16-bit address on 65816 (defaults to zero).
      Is preset to @code{$2000} for the HuC6280/PC-Engine.

@item x8
      Declares that immediate instructions accessing the index registers
      have 8 bits width (default, WDC65816 only).

@item x16
      Declares that immediate instructions accessing the index registers
      have 16 bits width (WDC65816 only).

@item xs
      Alias for @code{x8} (WDC65816 only).

@item xl
      Alias for @code{x16} (WDC65816 only).

@item zero
      Switch to a zero/direct page section called @code{zero} or @code{.zero},
      which has the type @code{bss} with attributes @code{"aurwz"}.
      Accesses to symbols from this section will default to zero page
      addressing mode.

@item zpage <symbol1> [,<symbol2>...]
      Mark symbols as zero/direct page and use zero page addressing for
      expressions based on this symbol, unless overridden by an addressing
      mode selector (like @code{>}).
@end table

All these directives are also available in the form starting with a
dot (@code{.}).

@section Optimizations

This backend performs the following operand optimizations and translations:

@itemize @minus

@item Absolute addressing modes are optimized to zero-page (or direct-page)
  addressing modes, whenever possible.
@item An absolute addressing mode will be promoted to long addressing
  (24 bits) for the WDC65816, when needed.
@item Conditional branches, where the destination is out of range, are
  translated into @code{B<!cc> *+5} and an absolute @code{JMP} instruction
  (@option{-opt-branch}).
@item Some CPUs also allow optimization of @code{JMP} to @code{BRA},
  when @option{-opt-branch} was given.

@end itemize

@section Known Problems

    Some known problems of this module at the moment:

@itemize @minus
@item None?

@end itemize

@section Error Messages

This module has the following error messages:

@itemize @minus

@item 2001: instruction not supported on selected architecture
@item 2002: trailing garbage in operand
@item 2003: selector prefix ignored
@item 2004: data size %d not supported
@item 2005: relocation does not allow hi/lo modifier
@item 2006: operand doesn't fit into %d bits
@item 2007: branch destination out of range
@item 2008: illegal bit number
@item 2009: identifier expected
@item 2010: bad operand
@item 2011: zero/direct-page addressing not available
@item 2012: operand not in zero/direct-page range
@item 2013: absolute-long addressing not available
@item 2014: cpu must be defined before any code is generated
@item 2015: unknown cpu model: %s

@end itemize
