This chapter describes the TOS output module, which can be
selected with option @option{-Ftos} to generate Atari TOS
executable files, or with option @option{-Fdri} to generate DRI-format object
files.

@section Legal

    This module is written in 2009-2016,2020,2021,2023 by Frank Wille and
    is covered by the vasm copyright without modifications.

@section Additional options for this module

@table @option
    @item -szbx
        Use the SozobonX extension, which allows symbol names with
        unlimited length in DRI objects and executables.
        Overrides the HiSoft extension.
    @item -stdsymbols
        Do not write HiSoft extended symbol names. Cut at 8 characters.
@end table
These options are valid for the @code{tos} module only:
@table @option
    @item -monst
        Write Devpac "MonST"-compatible symbols.
    @item -tos-flags=<flags>
        Sets the flags field in the TOS file header. Defaults to 0.
        Overwrites a TOS flags definition in the assembler source.
@end table

@section General

@table @option
  @item -Ftos
    The TOS executable file format is used on Atari 16/32-bit computers
    with 68000 up to 68060 CPU running any TOS, MiNT or any compatible
    operating system. The symbol table is in DRI format and may use
    HiSoft (default) or SozobonX extended symbol names.
  @item -Fdri
    The object file format defined by Digital Research for Atari M68k
    systems.
@end table

@section Restrictions

@itemize @minus
@item These file formats only support a single Text (code), Data and BSS
  section.
@item For @code{tos} all symbols must be defined, otherwise the generation
  of the executable fails. Unknown symbols are listed by vasm.
@item The only relocations allowed in @code{tos} are 32-bit absolute. For
  @code{dri} all 16- and 32-bit absolute and PC-relative relocations
  are supported. 16-bit base-relative appears as a 16-bit absolute symbol
  reference.
@item The maximum symbol length is 8 characters only. The @code{tos}
  format increases the maximum length to 22 by using an extension
  created by HiSoft, unless forbidden by @option{-stdsymbols}.
  With @option{-szbx} you may enable the SozobonX extension for
  unlimited length - but you need a linker which supports that format.
@item Symbol references in @code{dri} object files are limited to a
  maximum of 8192 symbols.
@end itemize
All these restrictions are defined by the file format itself.

@section Known Problems

    Some known problems of this module at the moment:

@itemize @minus
@item None.
@end itemize

@section Error Messages

This module has the following error messages:

@itemize @minus
@item 3004: section attributes <attr> not supported
@item 3005: reloc type %d, size %d, mask 0x%lx (symbol %s + 0x%lx) not supported
@item 3006: reloc type %d not supported
@item 3007: undefined symbol <%s>
@item 3008: output module doesn't allow multiple sections of the same type
@item 3010: section <%s>: alignment padding (%lu) not a multiple of %lu at 0x%llx
@item 3011: weak symbol <%s> not supported by output format, treating as global
@item 3020: too many symbols for selected output file format
@end itemize
