This chapter describes the standard syntax module which is available
with the extension @code{std}.

@section Legal

    This module is written in 2002-2024 by Volker Barthelmann and
    is covered by the vasm copyright without modifications.

@section Additional options for this module
 
This syntax module provides the following additional options:
 
@table @option
 
@item -ac
 Immediately allocate common symbols in the @code{.bss}/@code{.sbss}
 section and define them as externally visible.
@item -align
 Enforces the backend's natural alignment for all data directives
 (@code{.word}, @code{.long}, @code{.float}, etc.).
@item -gas
 Enable GNU-as compatibility mode. Currently this will only prevent
 labels prefixed by a dot to be recognized as local labels and turns
 @code{.org} into a pure section-offset.
@item -nodotneeded
 Recognize assembly directives without a leading dot (@code{.}).
@item -sdlimit=<n>
 Put data up to a maximum size of n bytes into the small-data
 sections. Default is n=0, which means the function is disabled.

@end table

@section General Syntax

Labels always have to be terminated by a colon (@code{:}), therefore
they don't necessarily have to start at the first column of a line.

Local labels may either be preceded by a '@code{.}' (unless option
@option{-gas} was given) or terminated by '@code{$}',
and consist out of digits only.
These labels exist and keep their value between two global label definitions.

A special form of reusable "local" labels, independent of global labels,
may be defined by using a single digit from @code{0} to @code{9}.
You can reference the nearest previous digit-label with @code{Nb} and the
nearest following digit-label with @code{Nf}, where @code{N} is such a digit.

Make sure that you don't define a label on the same line as a
directive for conditional assembly (@code{if}, @code{else}, @code{endif})!
This is not supported.

The operands are separated from the mnemonic by whitespace.
Multiple operands are separated by comma (@code{,}).

The chracter used to introduce comments is usually the semicolon (@code{;}).
Except for the following backends, which change it to a hash (@code{#})
character: ppc, vidcore, x86.

Example:
@example
mylabel:  inst.q1.q2 op1,op2,op3  # comment
@end example

In expressions, numbers starting with @code{0x} or @code{0X} are
hexadecimal (e.g. @code{0xfb2c}). @code{0b} or @code{0B} introduce
binary numbers (e.g. @code{0b1100101}). Other numbers starting with
@code{0} are assumed to be octal numbers, e.g. @code{0237}. All
numbers starting with a non-zero digit are decimal, e.g. @code{1239}.

C-like escape characters in string constants are allowed by default,
unless disabled by @option{-noesc}.

@section Directives

All directives are case-insensitive.
The following directives are supported by this syntax module (if the
CPU- and output-module allow it):

@table @code
@item .2byte <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
 See @code{.uahalf}.

@item .4byte <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
See @code{.uaword}. 

@item .8byte <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
See @code{.uaquad}. 

@item .ascii <exp1>[,<exp2>,"<string1>"...]
See @code{.byte}. 

@item .abort <message>
      Print an error and stop assembly immediately.

@item  .asciiz "<string1>"[,"<string2>"...]
See @code{.string}.    

@item .align <bitorbyte_count>[,<fill>][,<maxpad>]
      Depending on the current CPU backend @code{.align} either behaves
      like @code{.balign} (x86) or like @code{.p2align} (PPC).

@item .balign <byte_count>[,<fill>][,<maxpad>]
      Insert as many fill bytes as required to reach an address which
      is dividable by <byte_count>. For example @code{.balign 2} would
      make an alignment to the next 16-bit boundary, on a target with
      8-bit addressable memory.
      The padding bytes are initialized by <fill>, when given. The optional
      third argument defines a maximum number of padding bytes to use. When
      more are needed then the alignment is not done at all.

@item .balignl <bit_count>[,<fill>][,<maxpad>]
      Works like @code{.balign}, with the only difference that the optional
      fill value can be specified as a 32-bit word. Padding locations which
      are not already 32-bit aligned, will cause a warning and padded by
      zero-bytes.

@item .balignw <bit_count>[,<fill>][,<maxpad>]
      Works like @code{.balign}, with the only difference that the optional
      fill value can be specified as a 16-bit word. Padding locations which
      are not already 16-bit aligned, will cause a warning and padded by
      zero-bytes.

@item .byte <exp1>[,<exp2>,"<string1>"...]
      Assign the integer or string constant operands into successive
      8-bit memory cells in the current section. Any combination of integer
      and character string constant operands is permitted.

@item .comm <symbol>,<size>[,<align>]
      Defines a common symbol which has a size of <size> bytes. The
      final size and alignment is assigned by the linker, which
      will use the highest size and alignment values of all common
      symbols with the same name found. A common symbol is usually
      allocated in the .bss section of the final executable.
      In case the optional <align> argument was not specified the backend's
      default alignment for the given size will be used.

@item .double <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Parse one of more IEEE double precision floating point expressions and
      write them into successive blocks of 64 bits into memory using the
      backend's endianness.

@item .else
      Assemble the following block only if the previous @code{.if}
      condition was false.

@item .elseif <exp>
      Same as @code{.else} followed by @code{.if}, but without the
      need for an @code{.endif}. Avoids nesting.

@item .endif
      Ends a block of conditional assembly.

@item .endm
      Ends a macro definition.

@item .endr
      Ends a repetition block.

@item .equ <symbol>,<expression>
      See @code{.set}.

@item .equiv <symbol>,<expression>
      Assign the <expression> to <symbol> similar to @code{.equ} and
      @code{.set}, but signals an error when <symbol> has already been
      defined.

@item .err <message>
      Print a user error message. Do not create an output file.

@item .extern  <symbol>[,<symbol>...]
        See @code{.global}.

@item .fail <expression>
      Cause a warning when <expression> is greater or equal 500. Otherwise
      cause an error.

@item .file "string"
      Set the filename of the input source. This may be used by some
      output modules. By default, the input filename passed on the
      command line is used.

@item .float <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Parse one of more IEEE single precision floating point expressions and
      write them into successive blocks of 32 bits into memory using the
      backend's endianness.

@item .global <symbol>[,<symbol>...]
      Flag <symbol> as an external symbol, which means that <symbol> is
      visible to all modules in the linking process. It may be either
      defined or undefined.   

@item .globl <symbol>[,<symbol>...]
      See @code{.global}.

@item .half <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive 16-bit words of
      memory in the current section using the backend's endianness.

@item .if <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is non-zero.

@item .ifeq <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is zero.

@item .ifne <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is non-zero.

@item .ifgt <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is
      greater than zero.

@item .ifge <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is
      greater than zero or equal.

@item .iflt <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is
      less than zero.

@item .ifle <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is
      less than zero or equal.

@item .ifb <operand>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines when <operand> is
      completely blank, except an optional comment.

@item .ifnb <operand>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines when <operand> is
      non-blank.

@item .ifc <string1>,<string2>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines when <string1> matches
      <string2>. Empty strings are allowed. Quotes are optional.

@item .ifnc <string1>,<string2>
      Conditionally assembler the following lines when <string1> differs
      from <string2>. Empty strings are allowed. Quotes are optional.

@item .ifdef <symbol>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <symbol> is defined.

@item .ifndef <symbol>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <symbol> is undefined.

@item .incbin <file>
      Inserts the binary contents of <file> into the object code at
      this position.
      When the file size (in 8-bit bytes) is not aligned with the size
      of a target-byte the missing bits are automatically appended and
      assumed to be zero.
      As vasm's internal target-byte endianness for more than 8 bits per byte
      is big-endian, included binary files are assumed to have the same
      endianness. Otherwise you have to specify @option{-ile} to tell vasm
      that they use little-endian target-bytes (on your 8-bit bytes host
      file system).

@item .incdir <path>
      Add another path to search for include files to the list of
      known paths. Paths defined with @option{-I} on the command line are
      searched first.

@item .include <file>
      Include source text of <file> at this position.

@item .int <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive words of
      memory in the current section using the target's endianness and
      address size.

@item .irp <symbol>[,<val>...]
      Iterates the block between @code{.irp} and @code{.endr} for each
      @code{<val>}. The current @code{<val>}, which may be embedded in quotes,
      is assigned to @code{\symbol}. If no value is given, then the block is
      assembled once, with @code{\symbol} set to an empty string.

@item .irpc <symbol>[,<val>...]
      Iterates the block between @code{.irp} and @code{.endr} for each
      character in each @code{<val>}, and assign it to @code{\symbol}.
      If no value is given, then the block is assembled once, with
      @code{\symbol} set to an empty string.

@item .lcomm <symbol>,<size>[,<alignment>] 
      Allocate <size> bytes of space in the .bss section and assign
      the value to that location to <symbol>. If <alignment> is given,
      then the space will be aligned to an address having <alignment>
      low zero bits or 2, whichever is greater.
      <symbol> may be made globally visible by the .globl directive.

@item .list
      The following lines will appear in the listing file, when enabled.

@item .local <symbol>[,<symbol>...]
      Flag <symbol> as a local symbol, which means that <symbol> is
      local for the current file and invisible to other modules in
      the linking process.

@item .long <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive 32-bit words of
      memory in the current section using the backend's endianness.

@item .macro <name> [<argname1>[=<default>][,<argname2>...]]
      Defines a macro, which can be referenced by <name>. The macro
      definition is closed by an @code{.endm} directive. The argument
      names, which may be passed to this macro, must be declared directly
      following the macro name, separated by white-space. You can define an
      optional default value in the case an argument is left out.
      Note that macro names are case-insensitive while the argument
      names are case-sensitive.
      Within the macro context arguments are referenced by @code{\argname}.
      The special argument @code{\@@} inserts a unique id,
      useful for defining labels.
      @code{\()} may be used as a separator between the name of a macro
      argument and the subsequent text.

@item .nolist
      This line and the following lines will not be visible in a listing file.

@item .org <exp>[,<fill>]
      Before any section directive, and in absence of the @option{-gas}
      option, @code{<exp>} defines the absolute start address of
      the following code and @code{<fill>} has no meaning.
      Within a relocatable section @code{<exp>} defines the relative offset
      from the start of this section for the subsequent code.
      The optional <fill> value is only valid within a section and is used
      to fill the space to the new program counter (defaults to zero).
      When <exp> starts with a current-pc symbol followed by a plus (@code{+})
      operator, then the directive just reserves space (filled with zero).

@item .p2align <bit_count>[,<fill>][,<maxpad>]
      Insert as many fill bytes as required to reach an address where
      <bit_count> low order bits are zero. For example @code{.p2align 2} would
      make an alignment to the next 32-bit boundary, when the target has
      8-bit addressable memory.
      The padding bytes are initialized by <fill>, when given. The optional
      third argument defines a maximum number of padding bytes to use. When
      more are needed then the alignment is not done at all.

@item .p2alignl <bit_count>[,<fill>][,<maxpad>]
      Works like @code{.p2align}, with the only difference that the optional
      fill value can be specified as a 32-bit word. Padding locations which
      are not already 32-bit aligned, will cause a warning and padded by
      zero-bytes.

@item .p2alignw <bit_count>[,<fill>][,<maxpad>]
      Works like @code{.p2align}, with the only difference that the optional
      fill value can be specified as a 16-bit word. Padding locations which
      are not already 16-bit aligned, will cause a warning and padded by
      zero-bytes.

@item .popsection
      Restore the top section from the internal section-stack.
      Also refer to @code{.pushsection}.

@item .pushsection <name>[,"<attributes>"][[,@@<type>]|[,%<type>]|[,<mem_flags>]]
      Works exactly like @code{.section}, but additionally pushes
      the previously active section onto an internal stack, where it may be
      restored from by the @code{.popsection} directive.

@item .quad <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive quadwords
      (64-bit) of memory in the current section using the backend's
      endianness.

@item .rept <expression>
      Repeats the assembly of the block between @code{.rept} and @code{.endr}
      <expression> number of times. <expression> has to be positive.

@item .section <name>[,"<attributes>"][[,@@<type>]|[,%<type>]|[,<mem_flags>]]
      Starts a new section named @code{<name>} or reactivates an old one.
      When attributes are given for an already existing section, they must
      match exactly.
      The @code{"<attributes>"} string may consist of the following characters:

      Section Contents:
@table @code
@item a 
         section is allocated in memory

@item c 
         section has code

@item d 
         section has initialized data

@item u 
         section has uninitialized data

@item i 
         section has directives (info or offsets section)

@item n 
         section can be discarded
            
@item R 
         remove section at link time
@end table

      Section Protection:

@table @code          
@item r 
         section is readable
            
@item w 
         section is writable
           
@item x 
         section is executable
           
@item s 
         section is shareable
@end table

      Section Alignment: A digit, which is ignored. The assembler will
      automatically align the section to the highest alignment restriction
      used within.

      Memory attributes:

@table @code
@item C
         load section to Chip RAM (AmigaOS hunk format)
@item F
         load section to Fast RAM (AmigaOS hunk format)
@item z
         load section to zero/direct-page (6502, 65816, 680x, etc.)
@end table
      Any other attribute will still be accepted by vasm and passed to
      the output driver (which might ignore it).

      The optional @code{<type>} argument is mainly used for ELF output
      and may be introduced either by a '%' or a '@@' character.
      Allowed are:

@table @code
@item progbits
        This is the default value, which means the section data occupies
        space in the file and may have initialized data.
@item nobits
        These sections do not occupy any space in the file and will be
        allocated filled with zero bytes by the OS loader.
@end table

      When the optional, non-standard, @code{<mem_flags>} argument is given
      it defines a 32-bit memory attribute, which defines where to load
      the section (platform specific).
      The memory attributes are currently only used in the hunk-format
      output module.

@item .set <symbol>,<expression>
      Create a new program symbol with the name <symbol> and assign to it
      the value of <expression>. If <symbol> is already assigned, it will
      contain a new value from now on.
 
@item .size <symbol>,<size>
      Defines the size in bytes associated with the given <symbol>.
      This information is only used by some object file formats (for
      example ELF) and typically sets the size of function symbols.

@item .short <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive 16-bit words of
      memory in the current section using the backend's endianness.

@item .single <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Parse one of more IEEE single precision floating point expressions and
      write them into successive blocks of 32 bits into memory using the
      backend's endianness.

@item .skip <exp>[,<fill>]
      Insert <exp> zero or <fill> bytes into the current section.
 
@item .space <exp>[,<fill>]
      Insert <exp> zero or <fill> bytes into the current section.

@item .stabs "<name>",<type>,<other>,<desc>,<exp>
      Add a stab-entry for debugging, including a symbol-string and
      an expression.

@item .stabn <type>,<other>,<desc>,<exp>
      Add a stab-entry for debugging, without a symbol-string.

@item .stabd <type>,<other>,<desc>
      Add a stab-entry for debugging, without symbol-string and value.

@item .string "<string1>"[,"<string2>"...]
      Like @code{.byte}, but adds a terminating zero-byte.

@item .swbeg <op>
      Just for compatibility. Do nothing.

@item .type <symbol>,<type>
      Set type of symbol named <symbol> to <type>, which must be one of:
@table @code
      @item 1: Object
      @item 2: Function
      @item 3: Section
      @item 4: File
@end table
      The predefined symbols @code{@@object} and 
        @code{@@function} are available for
      this purpose.
      Only used by some object file formats (for example ELF).
 
@item .uahalf <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive 16-bit areas of
      memory in the current section regardless of current alignment.
 
@item .ualong <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive 32-bit areas of
      memory in the current section regardless of current alignment.

@item .uaquad <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive 64-bit areas of
      memory in the current section regardless of current alignment.

@item .uashort <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive 16-bit areas of
      memory in the current section regardless of current alignment.
 
@item .uaword <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive 16-bit areas
      of memory in the current section regardless of current alignment.

@item .weak <symbol>[,<symbol>...]
      Flag <symbol> as a weak symbol, which means that <symbol> is
      visible to all modules in the linking process and may be replaced
      by any global symbol with the same name.
      When a weak symbol remains undefined its value defaults to 0.
 
@item .word <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive 16-bit words of
      memory in the current section using the backend's endianness.

@item .zero <exp>[,<fill>]
      Insert <exp> zero or <fill> bytes into the current section.

@end table

Predefined section directives:
@table @code
@item .bss
      .section ".bss","aurw"
@item .data
      .section ".data","adrw"
@item .dpage
      .section ".dpage","adrwz"
@item .rodata
      .section ".rodata","adr"
@item .sbss
      .section ".sbss","aurw"
@item .sdata
      .section ".sdata","adrw"
@item .sdata2
      .section ".sdata2","adr"
@item .stab
      .section ".stab","dr"
@item .stabstr
      .section ".stabstr","dr"
@item .text
      .section ".text","acrx"
@item .tocd
      .section ".tocd","adrw"
@end table

@section Known Problems

    Some known problems of this module at the moment:

@itemize @minus

@item None.

@end itemize

@section Error Messages

This module has the following error messages:

@itemize @minus
@item 1001: mnemonic expected
@item 1002: invalid extension
@item 1003: no space before operands
@item 1004: too many closing parentheses
@item 1005: missing closing parentheses
@item 1006: missing operand
@item 1007: scratch at end of line
@item 1008: section flags expected
@item 1009: invalid data operand
@item 1010: memory flags expected
@item 1011: identifier expected
@item 1012: assembly aborted
@item 1013: unexpected "%s" without "%s"
@item 1014: pointless default value for required parameter <%s>
@item 1015: invalid section type ignored, assuming progbits
@item 1019: syntax error
@item 1021: section name expected
@item 1022: .fail %lld encountered
@item 1023: .fail %lld encountered
@item 1024: alignment too big

@end itemize
